		RELEASE PROSPECTUS FOR GIMP-PRINT 5.0

Robert Krawitz
June 7, 2003

*DRAFT*


This memo contains my recommendations for the release of the next
major release of Gimp-Print.  I recommend numbering it 5.0 rather than
4.4.  It has substantial architectural changes from 4.0 and is vastly
more capable.  Many key subsystems have been completely overhauled.

Architectural changes include:
------------- ------- -------

  1) A modular architecture for family drivers.  A "family driver" is
     a collection of printer drivers for one group of printers sharing
     a common programming architecture, e. g. ESC/P2, PCL, Lexmark,
     Canon.

  2) A modular architecture for color processing.  This architecture
     will enable us, or others, to provide color management without
     having to change the internal interfaces within Gimp-Print.

  3) New composite data types.  Gimp-Print 5.0 defines additional data
     types.  These types include:

     * Sequences, curves, and arrays.  A sequence is a primitive
       vector of numbers data type; curves and arrays provide
       additional capabilities such as interpolation (for curves) and
       multiple dimensions (for arrays).

     * Lists are a general ordered container of named objects of
       arbitrary type.  They are used throughout the core library, but
       are not presently exported as such, although derived types
       are.  The creator of a list can specify constructor,
       destructor, name comparison, copy, and sort operations on list
       members.

     * Parameters, which are part of the options system described
       below.  In addition to storing values and descriptions of the
       parameter, parameters can be queried to determine defaults and
       constraints.  Parameter lists (which use the list container
       internally) are also defined as part of this.

     * String lists are used in various ways; in particular, they are
       used by the parameter system to inform programs of the
       available choices of values for string-valued parameters.

  4) Complete overhaul of the options system.  Rather than offering a
     fixed set of operations, family drivers, color modules, etc. can
     now offer a wide variety of options using a predefined set of
     data types.  The data types currently supported are strings
     picked from a list, floating point numbers, integers, curves,
     arrays, Boolean values, and filenames.

     The new options system provides a flexible way for drivers to
     inform applications of default values and UI hints, the ability
     to selectively enable and disable options, and a generalized way
     of verifying legality of option choices.

  5) The coordinate system has been changed from bottom left to top
     left of the page, and the printable area can now extend beyond
     the edge of the page.  The result is a more intuitive coordinate
     system for driver writers that matches the coordinate system of
     printers, and the ability to do true full bleed.

  6) Complete overhaul of the black generation in CMYK output.  Black
     generation is now performed in the color code rather than the
     dither code.  This simplifies the dither code, puts the CMYK
     generation where it should be, and improves overall flexibility.

  7) Complete overhaul of the multi-tone (photo or quadtone) ink
     processing architecture (channels).  Instead of being processed
     as part of the dithering code as in 4.2, where ink drops of
     lighter inks were assigned virtual values proportional to their
     darkness as well as their size, this is now processed after the
     initial color conversion.  This has a number of major advantages:

     * As the actual amount of ink to be printed is visible to the
       color code, the color code can do ink limiting without fear
       that the dither code will change the amount of ink to be
       printed.

     * It ensures that the same proportions of inks will be printed at
       any density and resolution.  In 4.2, the ramp from light to
       dark ink varied depending upon the dot sizes available and
       hence the resolution.  This has already been demonstrated to
       yield much better linearity and much more neutral gray scale
       with even very modest tuning effort.

     * It enables use of all drop sizes of all ink tones.  In 4.2, we
       could not use the smallest drop size of dark ink, because the
       virtual dot size of a small dot of dark ink is typically close
       to the virtual dot size of a large dot of small ink.  This
       would yield very sharp transition, and perhaps even result in
       more light ink printed in darker regions than in lighter
       regions.  With channel processing separate from dithering, this
       concern no longer exists; we can safely use small drops of dark
       ink, improving smoothness.

     * It enables the color code to do ink limiting intelligently
       without concern that the dither code will rearrange things
       behind its back.

     * It greatly simplifies the specification of inks.  With drop
       size and darkness orthogonal, family drivers can greatly
       simplify their tables of inks.

     * Dither algorithms can choose to ignore smaller drop sizes if
       they wish to offer fast operation.

     * Applications with special requirements can now access the raw
       ink channels directly.  This facility was used to create a
       mechanism to more accurately tune printer inks.

  8) Use of true XML to store data about printers and paper sizes, and
     to represent new data types (sequences, curves, and arrrays).
     This currently uses libxml2; we may instead opt to use a lighter
     weight XML parser written by Mike Sweet.  Currently, the use of
     XML (as opposed to compiled-in data) is limited, but we expect
     that this will change beyond the initial 5.0 release.

  9) In addition to parameters, internal components such as family
     drivers, color drivers, etc. can store arbitrary data in the
     basic stp_vars_t object.  This facility is used to simplify the
     internal driver API; the family driver no longer needs to keep
     track of dither, color, etc. information itself.

  10) The Epson Stylus family driver has been decomposed into more
     functionally distinct units.  The data schema has been
     considerably improved, and the code itself broken into more
     easily maintained units.

  11) The build system has been updated with a more contemporary
     toolchain based on autoconf 2.5 and gettext 0.11.

  12) The Print plugin for the GIMP has been decomposed into a UI
     library and the core plugin.  The user interface library is a
     pure GTK1-based library; the tiny GIMP plugin is a client of this
     library.

  13) Redesign of the color system to use explicit descriptions of the
     input and output channel layout, color optimization, color
     vs. monochrome, and raw specifications to simplify and generalize
     the color architecture.  This architecture is based on the new
     options system and is extensible.  This permits use of 8 or 16
     bit inputs for all input types and desired processing methods.
     It permits later expansion to handle other types of input and bit
     depths without breaking compatibility.

  14) Creation of new opaque data types with explicit constructors and
     destructors makes for a more object-oriented programming model.


Internal quality improvements include:
-------- ------- ------------ -------

  1) Improved test suite with better coverage.

  2) The library has been audited for const-correctness.

  3) Valgrind has been used to fix memory leaks and other memory usage
     problems.


Major user-visible changes include:
----- ------------ ------- -------

  1) Significantly improved output quality from the Epson driver
     (which has been fully converted to using the new architecture).
     The new channel architecture directly contributed to this
     improvement.

  2) Many more user-accessible options, with some grouping of these
     options (much more work remains to be done).

  3) Simplification of the resolution settings for the Epson driver.
     Redundant resolution choices have been eliminated, and
     unidirectional vs. bidirectional has been eliminated.

  4) The old monochrome dithering option (which did a hard threshold
     dithering on the black channel) has been replaced by a
     generalized thresholding color driver.  Due to other
     improvements, this is as fast as the monochrome option was in
     4.2.

  5) The monolithic (stp) Ghostscript driver has been removed.  The
     only supported Ghostscript driver in Gimp-Print 5.0 is an
     IJS-based one.

  6) The Print plugin for the GIMP uses a new printrc format (v2) that
     permits full use of the new options system.  It can read the v1
     format.


Proposed release criteria:
-------- ------- --------

    * Changes that would be incompatible with the initial stable 5.0.0
      release that must be done within 12-24 months of release in
      order to be a viable solution are mandatory for this release.

      "Incompatible" to me means that applications dynamically linked
      against the baseline libgimpprint would not function correctly in
      the presence of a newer library on the same branch.  It also means
      things that will work fundamentally differently for the user.  This
      is intentionally vague; one person's fundamental difference is
      another's minor change.  For example, a change in output such that
      profiles generated for one release don't work well with the next
      release may or may not be fundamental.

      Note that it may not be necessary that a change be made in its
      entirety here.  If we can add a hook to enable us to add the
      capability after initial release, that may suffice.  For example, if
      we determine that ICC profiling will be necessary 6 months after
      initial release, it may be sufficient to have the hooks needed to
      add this in later.  In this case, the hooks may be mandatory for
      initial release even if ICC profiling isn't.  This is purely an
      example; it's not taking a position on ICC profiling per se.

      The new options and color systems considerably improves our
      ability to make such changes after release.

    * Significant quality or functionality regressions from 4.2.  This
      again is not cut and dried.  We may find, for example, that overall
      quality is greatly improved over 4.2, but there are a few corner
      cases with minor degradations.  This is a judgment call.

    * Major performance/memory consumption regressions from 4.2.  I
      would take a very hard line against these being mandatory in
      most cases; a moderate performance loss in the highest quality
      settings might not be an issue, especially if there are other
      settings yielding good quality that are close in performance.
      The average computer will be considerably faster by 5.0 release
      (mid 2004) than it was in late 2001.  To my mind, the regression
      has to be bad enough to really constitute a functional
      regression.

    * Changes whose absence would make the release fundamentally not
      useful for important classes of use.  This is a real can of worms,
      because just about everyone will consider their own use to be
      "important", and with good justification.  There will be some very
      hard choices to make here.


Recommended new feature list:
----------- --- ------- ----

This does not include printer tuning, regression testing, and bug
fixing.

Definitions of these priorities:

MANDATORY: an unresolved mandatory item will result in a release that
  is not usable by a broad segment of the user base.  While a
  MANDATORY feature is typically not an outright bug, the effect is
  that end users will experience a major loss of functionality
  compared with 4.2.

CRITICAL: functionality that is required for a high quality release.
  Critical functionality items are items that will be expected by a
  broad class of users, and which may be difficult to fix after
  initial 5.0 release, but which will not render the software
  unusable.

IMPORTANT: functionality that is expected by a broad class of users,
  or which will significantly improve our ability to maintain and
  develop Gimp-Print, but which can be resolved after initial release
  compatibly.  In many cases, the distinction between IMPORTANT and
  CRITICAL hinges on the ability to change or add the functionality
  after initial release, without requiring incompatible API changes.


    * Mandatory:

X     + GIMP 2.0 Print plugin.  Due to delays in our release cycle,
        The GIMP released its 2.0 release prior to our 5.0 release.
        This Print plugin needs to be easier to use than the current
        plugin.

	This supersedes an earlier (also mandatory) item to clean up
	the Print plugin.

	Needed for BETA.

	This is COMPLETE as of June 22, 2004.  This will be handed off
	to the GIMP team at some point for inclusion in the GIMP tree
	rather than ours.

X     + Elimination of libxml2 dependency.  OS X and at least some
        commercial UNIX variants do not bundle this with the OS, so
        this is a stopper.

	This is COMPLETE.  We are embedding Mike Sweet's MXML
	package.

X     + Update of the Foomatic data to the new data scheme.  The
        Foomatic data generation currently uses modified 4.2
        technology.

	This is COMPLETE, although subject to minor changes and bug
	fixes.

	UPDATE 20050324 Foomatic finally works (at least for simple
	cases, and the option system seems to work correctly) with
	Gutenprint 5.0.


    * Critical:

X     + Duplex support on appropriate printers.  This is RFE 644811.

	Dave Hill is presently working on this.  It would be very
	desirable to have this for beta, as it is a highly requested
	item.

	This is now active for the pcl-4 and pcl-900 drivers as of
	June 20, 2004.

X     + Resolution of all OS X printing issues.  There are a number of
        OS X problems (mostly related to the USB output driver, but
        some are also utility-related).  It is not clear whether we
        would hold the release indefinitely for this.  We will have to
        respond to individual issues.

	This is now COMPLETE.  Tyler Blessing has released the usbtb
	package, which is an updated USB driver for OS X.  He is
	maintaining it and releasing it on our site.

X     + Piecewise linear curves.  This is a more economical storage
        format for typical cases, and is much more useful for cubic
        spline interpolation than a dense curve is.

	Needed during ALPHA unless these can be added compatibly
	later.

	This is COMPLETE in coding and first pass testing.  It needs
	to be integrated into the GIMP plugin.

	UPDATE 20040529 GTK does not support piecewise curves.
	Therefore this would either require a GTK upgrade or a custom
	widget.  The standard GTK curve widget is deprecated in any
	event.  

	UPDATE 20040605 Mike Porter has provided a replacement widget
	which provides better services in this regard.  It needs to be
	integrated.

X     + Exposure of printer characteristics to the application level.
        This would allow printers to specify read-only parameters,
        such as the ordering of page output.  This would permit the
        PPD files to store the correct page order so that CUPS or
        Foomatic could give Ghostscript the correct options.

	This is COMPLETE as a framework.  A new read-only flag has
	been added to the stp_parameter_t data type permitting
	printers to export information of this kind.  The Epson driver
	exports information to escputil using this method.

X     + Investigation of printing to non-rectangular pages
        (e. g. direct printing to CD's).  This is seen as an important
        end-user capability.

	This is COMPLETE as an internal framework (via masking), and
	is used by the Epson driver.  No decision has been made about
	whether to export this.

X     + Change stp_parameter_class_t to a string instead of an enum,
        and subclass the parameter type (e. g. output->color
        controls).

	This has been accomplished by the expedient of adding a
	category member to the stp_parameter_t and is COMPLETE
	enough.

X     + A single quality parameter that provides a bundle of settings
        appropriate for what's being printed.

	This change would be highly desirable from an ease of use
	perspective (which is a long-standing weak point for
	Gimp-print).

	This would likely require specification of the media type
	(which must be set to whatever the user loads into the
	printer; it is an independent parameter) and output intent in
	addition to quality.

	For example, given the selection of paper type (if required)
        and image intent, appropriate choices of resolution, ink type,
        image optimization, dithering, etc. would be made.

	This is COMPLETE.

X     + Ink limiting.  The ability to limit the amount of ink
        deposited on the paper is important to ensuring good quality
        with dark tones without oversaturating the paper.  Many glossy
        papers in particular require that the amount of ink be
        carefully limited to avoid pooling.  The ink limiting needs to
        be done intelligently.

	This is marginal critical functionality.  It can be done after
	release, but not providing (and, where necessary,
	implementing) ink limiting may yield poor quality results.
	Changing the ink limiting after initial release could affect
	profiles generated against the initial release.

	This is present, although the algorithms can no doubt be
	improved.  At least as a basic feature it is COMPLETE.

X     + Support for 8 bit linearized, and 16 bit linearized and
	non-linearized, color inputs, in at least grayscale, RGB, CMY,
	CMYK, and printer-specific.

	This is marginally critical; it's critical mainly because we
	may have to make incompatible API changes after release to
	resolve this.  Currently we offer 8-bit linearized RGB and
	grayscale, 8-bit partially linearized CMYK, and 16-bit
	non-linearized CMYK and printer-specific.  These appear to be
	the most critical right now.  Of the options we don't offer,
	8-bit fully linearized CMYK is likely the most important,
	followed by 16-bit linearized CMYK, 16-bit linearized RGB,
	16-bit non-linearized RGB, and 16-bit linearized
	printer-specific.

	This is COMPLETE.

X     + Improvement of user controls (contrast and brightness).

	This is RFE 619299.  The request relates to the legacy
	behavior whereby the brightness control changes the black or
	white point of the print.  This behavior is reasonable when
	printing photos full bleed but is not reasonable when printing
	pages.

	The behavior of the controls as of 5.0 alpha-3 is very strange
	in the fully corrected RGB mode.  The user controls are
	applied after HSL remapping, which produces very strange
	effects such as non-monotonic luminance curves.  It's
	important for user adjustments (in particular, brightness,
	contrast, and saturation) to be made prior to HSL mapping, as
	HSL mapping is intended to correct for the printer.

	This is COMPLETE.  The brightness control now exponentially
	adjusts the luminance prior to HSL-remapping, effectively
	yielding a gamma-like curve in luminance, which produces a
	desirable effect.  Contrast is applied in RGB space prior to
	remapping.


    * Important:

      + XML profiles.

	Needed during BETA.  This may be doable as an upward
	compatible addition later.

X     + Header file reorganization.  The purpose of this project is to
        create a supported internal API for modules.

	Needed prior to BETA, as change is pervasive and will break
	programs.

	This is COMPLETE.

      + Color management.  This is of strategic importance, but is not
        a release stopper as it can be added modularly after release.
        However, it's a quality perception issue.

	Desirable for BETA.

	As of 20040529 (decision effectively made much earlier) this
	will not occur in 5.0.  This will either be done as a
	mandatory RFE in 5.2 or as a compatible enhancement later in
	5.0.

      + Investigation of a native OS X printer application layered on
        Gimp-print.

	No specific timeframe; the earlier the better.

      + Drop size matching tool, in support of general quality
        tuning.  This tool isn't interesting in and of itself, but
        it's a useful developer tool.

	Needed by BETA.  This may be doable by creative use of the raw
	input method.

      + Investigation of OS X requirements for mtink (or similar)
        distribution.

	Needed during BETA.

      + Update family drivers other than Epson driver to be
        data-driven.

	If this is to be done, it should be done by BETA for
	stability.


Proposed release schedule:
-------- ------- --------

MILESTONE			PLAN		CURRENT		COMPLETE
Alpha freeze (slush)		07/15/2003			N/A
Alpha 1				07/25/2003			01/11/2004
Alpha 2				08/08/2003			04/11/2004
Alpha 3				08/22/2003			05/12/2004
Beta freeze			09/05/2003			06/22/2004
Beta 1				09/12/2003			06/26/2004
Beta 2				10/03/2003	07/31/2004
Beta 3				10/24/2003	08/14/2004
Release freeze			11/07/2003	08/28/2004
RC1				11/14/2003	09/04/2004
RC2 (if needed)			11/21/2003	09/18/2004
Release				11/28/2003	09/25/2004


Proposed phase criteria:
-------- ----- --------

Alpha entry:

    Alpha software should be usable by early adopters who would like
    to pick up significant enhancements over 4.2, but who want to be
    able to get useful work done.  There may be significant
    workarounds required, but nothing too arcane.

    All architectural changes must be substantially complete.  If
    there is significant missing critical functionality, we need to
    decide whether to adjust the schedule or defer the functionality.

    There is no restriction on performance or quality tuning or point
    quality improvement.

    There is no restriction on user interface changes.

    There is no restriction on component changes.

    After alpha entry, any changes to public header files (header
    files intended for applications to use) must be discussed in
    advance on the mailing list.  Major changes to internal header
    header files not specific to individual components should likewise
    be discussed.

    OS X builds and packages should start at this point.

Alpha exit and Beta freeze:

    All tests pass.

    No memory leaks or other errors from valgrind (exact cases TBD).

    Agreement by core development team is required to declare alpha
    exit.

Beta 1 entry:

    Beta software should be usable by mainstream early adopters who
    want to be able to get useful work done with a minimum of
    surprises.  There may be some workarounds required.  Translation
    and documentation need not be complete.

    All architectural changes must be complete.  If there is missing
    critical functionality, we again need to decide whether to adjust
    the schedule or defer the functionality.  Deferring functionality
    requires demonstration that it constitutes a showstopper.

    There should be no changes to public header files after this
    point.  Any changes to internal non-component header files should
    be discussed on the list.

    There is no restriction on point quality improvements or tuning.
    Pervasive quality tuning (e. g. significant changes to how the
    color or dither code changes) should be discussed and approved by
    the core developers prior to being checked in.

    Documentation should start at this point.

Beta 2 entry:

    End users should require an absolute minimum of workarounds at
    this point.  There may be point bugs in specific cases; there
    should not be any regressions from 4.2.

    There should be no string changes at this point.  This build
    should contain the frozen .po file for translation.

    There should be at most only minimal changes to internal header
    files at this point, and the development team must carefully
    weigh the benefits against the risks.

    There may be some point quality improvements at this point, but
    they should be evaluated carefully.

    Package release notes (delta from 4.2) should be started.

Beta 3 entry:

    End users should be able to use this software with good
    confidence.  There should be very few bugs left at this stage.

    There should be no changes to internal header files at this point.

    Quality tuning should be complete.

RC1 entry:

    The software should be complete except possibly for final
    translations and documentation, but those should be close to
    complete.

    Release notes (delta from 4.2) should be available at this point.

    Only true showstopper bugs should be fixed at this point.  All
    commits should be approved by the development team.

RC2 entry:

    There should not be an RC2.  If this is needed, it should be for
    minor documentation changes and final translations only.

Release:

    The entire package should be complete, and all agreed-upon bugs
    fixed.    


This schedule and phase criteria is based on the 4.0 and 4.2 release
cycles, as described below.  This schedule is heavily weighted by the
4.2 release, which I believe went extremely well and which I would
like to use as a model.

    4.0:
	    Alpha   - 08/09/2000 (3 releases)
	    Beta    - 09/22/2000 (3 beta + 1 RC)
	    Release - 10/28/2000 (4 releases)
	    4.0.4   - 11/27/2000 (this was the first really stable release)

	    So we effectively had a 6 week alpha and 9 week beta, since
	    the first month of our "stable" release cycle really wasn't.
	    We had 3 alpha and 8 beta releases.

    4.2:
	    Alpha   - 07/14/2001 (3 releases)
	    Beta    - 09/07/2001 (4 releases + 1 RC)
	    Release - 11/23/2001 (first release was solid)

	    This was 8 weeks of alpha and 11 weeks of beta

    We've generally made significant changes (but not major rework) in
    alpha, but we've been fairly strict about locking down beta.  In my
    view, alpha should be stable enough that fairly adventurous users are
    willing to use it for production, and beta should be such that
    mainstream early adopters would be comfortable if they can back out if
    need be.  I personally favor a longer beta cycle with perhaps the last
    few betas being release candidates.  Compressing beta merely means
    that there will be more releases early in the cycle as we catch up on
    issues.

    The trend would suggest about 2 months of alpha and 3 months of beta.
    So to release in early December we'd need to go alpha in early July
    and beta in early September, with releases every 3 weeks or so.  This
    doesn't give us a lot of time.  It suggests that we need to be
    finishing up any sweeping rearchitecture work quickly, and smaller
    rearchitecture projects need to complete in the next month or two.

    We should go back and review the release notes from 4.1 and 4.2 alpha
    and beta releases to determine where we are quality-wise compared to
    similar points in the last release cycle.  If our quality is better
    than it was at similar points, I'd rather use the time to try to
    release early or do more testing rather than cram more features in.
    If it looks worse, we need to re-evaluate the schedule or redirect
    effort rather than release with subpar quality.


Potential remaining changes in 5.0 need to be carefully evaluated:
--------- --------- ------- -- --- ---- -- -- --------- ---------

This is the complete list of potential tasks.

    * Internal architecture:

      + Push-based input model (application pushes data into driver rather
	than driver asking for data)

	This does not appear to me to be mandatory for this release,
	although changing it later would be incompatible.  The primary
	motivation for this that I see is to enable multi-threaded
	performance improvements.  This is moderate risk,
	moderate-high effort, currently low return.

      + Giving the image layer access to the driver data (by passing the
	stp_vars_t to it along with the buffer information)

	This is low effort and low risk to implement.  However, it
	poses quality risks, as image layers could easily violate
	implied rules by mutating data.  Unclear what return.

      + Allowing options to be changed part way through the page.

	This is high effort (from a quality assurance), high risk, low
	return as a general capability.  The main purpose of this
	would be to assist testing and tuning activities.  It could
	perhaps be done as a back door.

X     + Header file reorganization, to expose internal API's intended for
	developers to write modules against.

	This is moderate effort, moderate risk, moderate return..  The
	risk involved is in regards doing it well, so that we don't
	have to do it again later (which would be disruptive).

      + Source file reorganization, to put module sources into separate
	directories from the main source.

	I think this would be desirable, even though it would break
	the version history.  Whether it needs to be done in the 5.0
	timeframe, though, is another matter.

	This is moderate effort, high risk, low short-term but
	moderate long-term return.  It would lose a lot of version
	history, making it a lot harder for us to analyze regressions.

      + Project reorganization, to put the applications into separate
	release packages.

	This would probably just make life more difficult for users.
	I don't recommend it.

      + XML profiles (independent of color management -- this would allow
	tuning drop sizes, 6-color and third-party inksets, and saving the
	Gimp-print settings away).

	This change would be highly desirable indeed.  It would enable
	us to make changes in the future by just distributing new
	data.  It could also be used to allow users to save bundles of
	settings, so this may be multiple projects.

	High effort, moderate-high risk, high return.  The benefits
	would be great.

      + Array-typed parameters.  This would enable e. g. specifying the
	ink densities for quadtones as members of an array, rather than
	having to statically name them.

	This might not be too easy to do compatibly, but whether there
	are any really critical use cases is another matter.

	Moderate-high effort, moderate risk, likely moderate return.

X     + Exposure of more internal printer parameters (such as ink
	description, which way pages are printed, etc.) to the application
	level.

	This would be highly desirable, if for no other reason than to
	tell genppd what the correct ordering is for pages.  

	Low-moderate effort (mostly in design), low-moderate risk,
	high return.  The primary risk factor is ensuring that this
	information is correct and is used correctly.

	UPDATE 20060704: A number of these parameters are exposed and
	used by escputil.  This is otherwise an open-ended item and
	should be handled on a case-by-case basis.

    * Color:

      + Fully pipelined color architecture, including ability to chain
	together color modules

	The most obvious use for this would be to generalize the
	channel code, by making the CMYK and photo/quadtone
	conversions simply be color modules.  Beyond that, it's not
	clear what the use case would be.

	High effort, high risk, low short-term return.  This would
	need significant effort to ensure that no corner cases are
	missed.

      + Color management (Argyll or LCMS would appear to be the leading
	contenders, but we need to evaluate them and possibly others).  This
	feature is specifically for color management, distinct from internal
	capabilities that permit color management.

	This is strategically important, but not clearly a release
	stopper.  We need to understand CUPS and OS X plans.

	High-very high effort, moderate risk, likely very high return.
	Argyll has a very obscure build procedure that is not ready
	for production use; LCMS is unknown.  Primary risk is in
	testing and quality control, although third-party exposure is
	in there, too.

X     + Support for arbitrary (or at least 1, 8, and 16 bit) color inputs,
	both linearized and non-linearized, in at least grayscale, RGB, CMY,
	CMYK, and printer-specific.

	We need a use case for 8-bit pre-linearized inputs (which
	would seem to be useless from a quality perspective) and
	16-bit non-linearized inputs (which looks more likely).

	Currently 8 and 16 bit inputs in all of these modes exist.

	Moderate-high effort, moderate risk, likely moderate return.
	Large testing effort.

	UPDATE 20060704: This was done in the color code quite a while
	back, at least for 8 and 16 bits.  There has been no real push
	for 1 or 4 bits.

      + Support for other input color spaces (e. g. CMYKOG, spot color
	channels).  An option would be to implement this kind of
	capability in the color interface, but not implement these
	specialized inputs.

	I don't believe this is necessary at this time.  If it becomes
	necessary, it could be done via the raw interface.

	Very high effort, high risk, likely low return at present.
	Would require at a minimum header file change (which may or
	may not be compatible).

    * Screening:

      + Loadable dither modules

	I don't believe this to be critical, but we may need more
	research.  If somebody wants to implement e. g. pseudo-offset
	screening, this would be needed.

	Moderate effort, low risk, low return..

      + Support for dithering other than 16-bit values (1, 4, 8, and
	floating point are the most obvious candidates).  This is a
	performance issue more than anything else.  Again, an option would
	be to implement this kind of interface, but not necessarily
	implement instances of it.

	We need to understand the performance profile.

	Moderate effort, moderate risk (primary issue is enumerating
	all the cases), low-moderate return.

      + Improvements to adaptive hybrid, which is somewhat broken right
	now (arguably a fix)

	We need to compare a variety of use cases with 4.2 to
	determine if there is any regression.

	Moderate-high effort, moderate-high risk, unknown return.
	Main issue is testing.

      + Further improvements and cleanup to Even Tone.

	This is just a quality improvement.

	Moderate effort, moderate risk (primarily regression risk),
	potentially moderate return.

      + Support for Even Better Screening (a newer screening algorithm
	Raph Levien came up with)

	???

	Likely to be high effort, low risk, completely unknown return.

      + Splitting out initialization for the dither algorithms, to reduce
	the work for algorithms that don't need certain facilities (such
	as the pick matrix, or any dither matrix at all).

	This would be nice to do, but it could be done later and it's
	not going to affect the user experience.

	Moderate effort, moderate risk, low short-term but high
	long-term return.

    * Family drivers:

      + Conversion of the family driver data to XML formats (rather than
	being compiled in)

	Highly desirable, but can probably be done later without any
	compatibility issues.

	High-very high effort, high risk (ensuring that the data is
	re-created correctly in new format), in intermediate-long term
	high return.

      + Update of the family drivers other than the Epson driver.

	This really needs to be done, but would it stop a release,
	since it's not a regression?

	Moderate-high effort, moderate risk, very high return.

      + Removal of the Postscript family driver (possibly putting it in
	libgimpprintui, so that the GIMP plugin would have access to it).

	The Postscript driver is really a fairly ugly hack
	specifically for the GIMP plugin.  This would be a really good
	test of the module system.

	Moderate effort, moderate risk, low return.

X     + Completion of the Olympus driver (to handle image sizes that don't
	match the page size)

	This is really a bug fix.  Unknown effort and risk, high
	return (in terms of quality).

	UPDATE 20060704: This was actually done in August 2003.

      + Enhancements to the raw driver

	No obvious use case.  This project is too ill-defined to
	evaluate risk, effort, and return.

      + TIFF driver

	No obvious use case.  Effort likely moderate-high, risk low,
	return unclear.

      + Other family drivers

	Anybody want to write any?

    * Support infrastructure:

X     + Support for non-rectangular paper sizes (e. g. for CD's)

	We need to understand what this means.  Is this something we
	could simply trust the application to do?

	Project needs to be defined better, but potentially high
	benefit.

	UPDATE 20060704: this is exposed to family drivers to allow
	e. g. printing to CD's, and is used by the Epson driver.

X     + Piecewise linear curves

	This would be highly desirable to simplify things.  It would
	be a much better format for PPD files.

	Effort moderate, risk moderate-high, benefit moderate-high.

	UPDATE 20060704: this was done a while back.

      + Constant or logarithmic list search time

	No clear use case.

	Effort moderate, risk moderate, benefit presently low.

    * User interface:

      + GUI reorganization, particularly for the output controls

	This needs to be done for the Print plugin to be usable.

	Effort high, risk moderate, benefit very high.

      + Qt/KDE GUI

	No clear driver.

	Effort high, risk moderate (mostly quality and schedule),
	benefit unknown.

      + Native OS X GUI/printer application

	This needs investigation.  A lot of the problems with 4.2
	really turn out to be OS X/CUPS interactions.

	Effort and risk likely high-very high; benefit potentially
	very high.  Need more info on CUPS/OS X futures.

X     + GTK2+ GUI for newer versions of the GIMP

	Does not need to be synchronized with 5.0 release.

	Effort and risk likely moderate-high; benefit low in the short
	term but very high in the long term.

	UPDATE 20060704: this was done a very long time ago.

      + Change stp_parameter_class_t to a string instead of an enum
      + Add subclasses to stp_parameters to hint user interfaces

	These two changes would be highly desirable, and can't be done
	compatibly.  This should be done at the latest in early alpha.

	Effort moderate, risk moderate (architectural), benefit likely
	high.

	UPDATE 20060704: there is an additional string-valued UI hint,
	although nothing's using it.

X     + Support a new "quality" parameter that provides a bundle of
        settings appropriate for whatever else is being printed.

	Effort low-moderate, risk moderate (mostly quality-related),
	benefit very high (ease of use).

	UPDATE 20060704: Epson driver does this.

    * Performance:

      + Sharing color/dither setup data across pages to amortize away
	startup overhead

	What's the use case?

	Effort moderate, risk moderate-high (with potentially high
	quality risk due to ability of user to change things behind
	the driver's back), benefit unknown.  Potential solutions
	might involve caching data.

    * CUPS driver:

      + Use the new CUPS data types (possibly breaking compatibility with
	older versions of CUPS)

	Need to understand better.

	Effort, risk, and benefit unknown.

	UPDATE 20060704: CUPS 1.2 beat us to the punch.  This needs to
	be done soon!

    * Tools:

      + Color matching tool (to allow matching 6 color, quadtone, and
	hextone inks).  My conception of this is that it would print a
	solid bar with the lighter colored ink and a sweep with the darker
	colored ink, and having the user pick where along the bar the
	tones match.

	There's already a prototype that does just this (not with a
	nice interface, though), and it helped a lot.  But do we need
	to refine it?

	Effort low-high (depending upon how sophisticated we make it),
	risk low-moderate, benefit beyond current "tool" unknown.

      + Drop size matching tool.  Same idea.

	This would also be very useful, but it would require some kind
	of support at the dithering level to work.

	Effort moderate, risk high (due to support at the dithering
	level), benefit unknown.

    * Release engineering:

      + Update the developer and user documentation.

	Mandatory.

	UPDATE 20060704: This is only partially done.  The developer
	doc is basically the raw doxygen output; the user doc is
	encapsulated in the NEWS and README.

      + Rehosting the project.  Sourceforge doesn't provide very good
	tools for bug tracking, in particular (it's really lacking
	compared to Bugzilla).

	Doing this post-release would be confusing.

      + Distribute mtink with the OS X package.

	Need to understand OS X requirements.
